In the previous video, we saw how Stanford researchers use the Apple Watch to detect
atrial fibrillation and that the watch was correct 34 percent of the time.
This is a landmark study in the use of wearables for clinical research.
But I don't think we should focus too much on the 34 percent number
or overthink how the Apple Watch could be used as a screening or diagnostic tool.
Reason for this is that the study
deviated from typical clinical trials that tried to prove
the effectiveness of a new device or drug in a few significant ways.
First, the study didn't send ECG chest patches to everyone,
it only sent it to the people who
were notified by the watch of an irregular pulse rhythm.
So we don't know how many people in the study had AFib that the watch didn't detect.
In other words, we don't really know what the false negative rate was.
Second, the inclusion criteria for the study was pretty strict.
You had to have an iPhone and an Apple Watch,
which meant that the study population skewed to a more tech savvy,
younger, and more affluent population.
You typically want your study population to match
the population for the medical condition that you're researching,
which for AFib skews older and is not really limited by social and economic boundaries.
But it's easy to see why researchers chose to
leverage existing Apple Watch customers for their study.
They managed to enroll 400,000 people without having to buy a single device.
However, if wearable research continues like this where studies are conducted using
devices with large market penetration and on people who already own those devices,
the findings are bound to be bias.
In much the same way in machine learning algorithms can over fit on their training set,
interventions or discoveries made on a bias to
clinical study population maybe more specifically tailored to this population,
and they may be less effective on a less affluent population.
For example, you'll learn that one source of noise for the PPG sensor,
which is the sensor used in detecting the irregular pulse rhythm,
is skin color and in the United States,
we know that skin color is heavily correlated with wealth and access to wearables.
This is similar to why researchers try hard to
enroll minority populations in their clinical trials.
As I mentioned earlier, I do think this study
was a landmark study in the use of wearables in
clinical research and it incredibly recruited
almost half a million people for the study in just eight months.
Then we learned that when you recruit over the Internet like this,
you lose a lot of participants to follow up.
For example, over 2,000 participants were notified of an irregular pulse,
but only 450 ECG chest patches were returned to researchers.
Somewhere between receiving the chess patch
to putting it on to returning to the study staff,
1,500 people dropped out.
We also learned how users would interact to a smartwatch,
notifying them of a heart abnormality as it was happening.
I think the study is super exciting in that it's the first major attempt to use
the capability of wearables to do a long term monitoring in a medical context.
There's obviously a lot of hype around studies like this,
and I want us to be excited about the right things.